Minimum Wages Act, 1948 
SECTION CONTENT 
1 Short title, extent and application  
2 Interpretation 
3 Fixing of minimum rates of wages 
4 Minimum rate of wages 
5 Procedure for fixing and revising minimum wages 
6 ** ** ** 
7 Advisory Board 
8 Central Advisory Board 
9 Composition of committees, etc. 
10 Correction of errors 
11 Wages in kind 
12 Payment of minimum rates of wages 
13 Fixing hours for a normal working day, etc. 
14 Overtime 
15 Wages of worker who works for less than normal working day 
16 Wages for two or more classes of work 
17 Minimum time rate wages for piece work 
18 Maintenance of registers and records 
19 Inspectors 
20 Claims 
21 Single application in respect of a number of employees 
22 Penalties for certain offences 
22A General provision for punishment of other offences 
22B Cognizance of offences 
22C Offences by companies 
22D Payment of undisbursed amounts due to employees 
22E Protection against attachment of assets of employer with 
Government 
22F Application of Payment of Wages Act, 1936, to scheduled 
employments 
23 Exemption of employer from liability in certain cases 
24 Bar of suits 
25 Contracting out 
26 Exemptions and exceptions 
27 Power of State Government to add to Schedule 
28 Power of Central Government to give directions 
29 Power of the Central Government to make rules 
30 Power of appropriate Government to make rules 
30A Rules made by Central Government to be laid before 
Parliament 
31 Validation of fixation of certain minimum rates of wages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948 
[11 OF 1948] 
An Act to provide for fixing minimum rates of wages in certain 
employments. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for fixing minimum rates of wages in 
certain employments; 
It is hereby enacted as follows.- 
Section 1: 
Short title and extent. 
(1) This Act may be called the Minimum Wages Act, 1948. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India [1] [***] 
Section 2: 
Interpretation. 
In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- 
(a)"adolescent" means a person who has completed his fourteenth year of age 
but has not completed his eighteenth year; 
(aa) "adult" means a person who has completed his eighteenth year of age 
(b) "appropriate Government" means,- 
(i) in relation to any scheduled employment carried on by or under the 
authority of the [3] [Central Government, or a railway administration], or in 
relation to a mine, oilfield or major port, or any corporation established by 
[4] [a Central Act], the Central Government, and 
(ii) in relation to any other scheduled employment, the State Government; 
(bb) "child" means a person who has not completed his fourteenth year of 
age; 
(c) "competent authority" means the authority appointed by the appropriate 
Government by notification in its Official Gazette to ascertain from time to 
time the cost of living index number applicable to the employees employed 
in the scheduled employments specified in such notification; 
(d) cost of living index number", in relation to employees in any scheduled 
employment in respect of which minimum rates of wages have been fixed, 
means the index number ascertained and declared by the competent authority 
by notification in the Official Gazette to be the cost of living index number 
applicable to employees in such employment; 
(e) "employer" means any person who employs, whether directly or through 
another person, or whether on behalf of himself or any other person, one or 
more employees in any scheduled employment in respect of which minimum 
rates of wages have been fixed under this Act, and includes, except in sub-
section (3) of section 26,- 
(i) in a factory where there is carried on any scheduled employment in 
respect of which minimum rates of wages have been fixed under this Act, 
any person named under [6] [clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 7 of the 
Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948)], as manager of the factory; 
(ii) in any scheduled employment under the control of any Government in 
India in respect of which minimum rates of wages have been fixed under this 
Act, the person or authority appointed by such Government for the 
supervision and control of employees or where no person or authority is so 
appointed, the head of the department; 
(iii) in any scheduled employment under any local authority in respect of 
which minimum rates of wages have been fixed under this Act, the person 
appointed by such authority for the supervision and control of employees or 
where no person is so appointed, the chief executive officer of the local 
authority; 
(iv) in any other case where there is carried on any scheduled employment in 
respect of which minimum rates of wages have been fixed under this Act, 
any person responsible to the owner for the supervision and control of the 
employees or for the payment of wages; 
 
STATE AMENDMENT 
MADHYA PRADESH 
In clause (e) of section 2 for the words, brackets and figures "and includes, 
except in sub-section (3) of section 26", the words, brackets and figures "and 
includes a Person deemed to be an employer under section 18A and further 
includes, except in sub-section (3) of section 26" shall be substituted - vide 
Madhya Pradesh Act No. 11 of 1959 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(g) "scheduled employment" means an employment specified in the 
Schedule, or any process or branch of work forming part of such 
employment; 
(h) "wages" means all remuneration, capable of being expressed in terms of 
money, which would, if the terms of the contract of employment, express or 
implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a person employed in respect of his 
employment or of work done in such employment, [7] [and includes house 
rent allowance] but does n6t include 
(i) the value of - 
(a) any house- accommodation, supply of light, water, medical attendance, or 
(b) any other amenity or any service excluded by general or special order of 
the appropriate Government; 
(ii) any contribution paid by the employer to any Pension Fund or Provident 
Fund or under any scheme of social insurance; 
(iii) any travc1ling allowance or the value of any traveling concession; 
(iv) any sum paid to the person employed to defray special expenses entailed 
on him by the nature of his employment; or 
(v) any gratuity payable on discharge; 
(i) "employee" means any person who is employed for hire or reward to do 
any work, skilled or unskilled, manual or clerical, in a scheduled 
employment in respect of which minimum rates of wages have been fixed; 
and includes an out-worker to whom any articles or materials are given out 
by another person to be made up, cleaned, washed, altered, ornamented, 
finished, repaired, adapted or otherwise processed for sale for the purposes of 
the trade or business of that other person where the process is to be carried 
out either in the home of the out-worker or in some other premises not being 
premises under the control and management of that other person; and also 
includes an employee declared to be an employee by the appropriate 
Government; but does not include any member of the Armed Forces of the 
[8] [Union]. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
MADHYA PRADESH 
In section 2 clause (i) shall be renumbered as clause (ee) and to clause (ee) as 
so renumbered the following Explanation shall be added, namely: 
"Explanation : An employee who has been dismissed, discharged or 
retrenched from employment or whose employment has been otherwise 
terminated shall, in respect of all claims arising out of payment of less than 
the minimum rates of wages or in respect of the payment of remuneration for 
days of rest or for work done on such days under clause (b) or clause (c) of 
sub-section (1) of section 13 or of wages at the overtime rate under section 
14 during the period of his employment, be deemed to be an employee for 
the purpose of this Act." - Madhya Pradesh Act No. 23 of 1961. 
MAHARASHTRA 
In section 2, in clause (z), for the words "and management of that other 
persons, "the words "and management of that other person; and includes for 
the purposes of sections 20,21, 22, 22A, 22B, 22C and 22D any person who 
has been an employee and who has ceased to be so by reason of 
superannuation, retirement, dismissal, removal, discharge, termination of his 
service, or otherwise howsoever;" shall be substituted - Maharashtra Act No. 
3 of 1963. 
Section 3: 
Fixing of minimum rates of wages. 
(1) The appropriate Government shall, in the manner hereinafter provided,- 
(a) fix the minimum rates of wages payable to employees employed in an 
employment specified in  
Part I or Part II of the Schedule and in an employment added to either Part by 
notification under section 27: 
Provided that the appropriate Government may, in respect of employees 
employed in an employment specified in Part II of the Schedule, instead of 
fixing minimum rates of wages under this clause for the whole State, fix such 
rates for a part of the State or for any specified class or classes of such 
employment in the whole State or part thereof. 
(b) review at such intervals as it may think fit, such intervals not exceeding 
five years, the minimum rates of wages so fixed and revise the minimum 
rates, if necessary: 
Provided that where for any reason the appropriate Government has not 
reviewed the minimum rates of wages fixed by it in respect of any scheduled 
employment within any interval of five years, nothing contained in this 
clause shall be deemed to prevent it from reviewing the minimum rates after 
the expiry of the said period of five years and revising them, if necessary, 
and until they are so revised the minimum rates in force immediately before 
the expiry of the said period of five years shall continue in force. 
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the appropriate 
Government may refrain from fixing minimum rates of wages in respect of 
any scheduled employment in which there are in the whole State less than 
one thousand employees engaged in such employment, but if at any time[12] 
[***] the appropriate Government comes to a finding after such inquiry as it 
may make or cause to be made in this behalf that the number of employees in 
any scheduled employment in respect of which it has refrained from fixing 
minimum rates of wages has risen to one thousand or more, it shall fix 
Minimum rates of wages payable to employees in such employment [13] [as 
soon as may be after such finding]. 
(2) The appropriate Government may fix, - 
(a) a minimum rate of wages for time work (hereinafter referred to as "a 
minimum time rate"); 
(b) a minimum rate of wages for piece work (hereinafter referred to as "a 
minimum piece rate"); 
(c) a minimum rate of remuneration to apply in the case of employees 
employed on piece work for the purpose of securing to such employees a 
minimum rate of wages on a time work basis (hereinafter referred to as "a 
guaranteed time rate"); 
(d) a minimum rate (whether a time rate or a piece rate) to apply in 
substitution for the minimum rate which would otherwise be applicable, in 
respect of overtime work done by employees (hereinafter referred to as 
"overtime rate"). 
(2A) Where in respect of an industrial dispute relating to the rates of wages 
payable to any of the employees employed in a scheduled employment, any 
proceeding is pending before a Tribunal or National Tribunal under the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (24 of 1947) or before any like authority under 
any other law for the time being in force, or an award made by any Tribunal, 
National Tribunal or such authority is in operation, and a notification fixing 
or revising the minimum rates of wages in respect of the scheduled 
employment is issued during the pendency of such proceeding or the 
operation of the award, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
the minimum rates of wages so fixed or so revised shall not apply to those 
employees during the period in which the proceeding is pending and the 
award made therein is in operation or, as the case may be, where the 
notification is issued during the period of operation of an award, during that 
period; and where such proceeding or award relates to the rates of wages 
payable to all the employees in the scheduled employment, no minimum 
rates of wages shall be fixed or revised in respect of that employment during 
the said period. 
(3) In fixing or revising minimum rates of wages under this section, - 
(a) different minimum rates of wages may be fixed for- 
(i) different scheduled employments; 
(ii) different classes of work in the same scheduled employment; 
(iii) adults, adolescents, children and apprentices; 
(iv) different localities; 
(b) minimum rates of wages may be fixed by any one or more of the 
following wage periods, namely:- 
(i) by the hour,  
(ii) by the day, 
(iii) by the month, or 
(iv) by such other larger wage period as may be prescribed; and where such 
rates are fixed by the day or by the month ' the manner of calculating wages 
for a month or for a day, as the case may be, may be indicated:] 
Provided that where any wage-periods have been fixed under section 4 of 
the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936), minimum wages shall be fixed 
in accordance therewith.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
ANDHRA PRADESH 
In clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3 - 
(a) in sub-clauses (i) and (it), for the words, figures and letters "before the 
31st day of December, 1959', the words, figures and letters "before the 3 1 st 
day of December, 1961 " shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-clause (iii), for the words, "one year" the words "two years" shall 
be substituted - Andhra Pradesh Act No. 19 of 1961. 
BIHAR 
In section 3, sub-section (2A) shall be omitted - Bihar Ordinance No. 41 of 
1982. 
In sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3 for the words 
and figures "before the 31st day of December, 1959", the words and figures 
"before the 31st day of December, 1961" shall be substituted -Bihar Act No. 
3 of 1961. 
GUJARAT 
In section 3- 
(1) in clause (a) of sub-section (1) 
(a) in sub-clause (i), the following Provisos shall be added at the end, 
namely- 
"Provided that where the appropriate Government is the State Government, 
this sub-clause shall have effect as if the words, figures and letters "before 
the 31st day of December, 1959" had been deleted: 
Provided further that the State Government may, instead of fixing minimum 
rates of wages under this sub-clause for the whole State fix such rates for a 
part of the State, and in the case of an employment under any local authority 
the State Government may fix such rates for any specified local authority, or 
class of local authorities;"; 
(b) in sub-clause (ii),- 
(i) after the figure"1959" the following Proviso shall be inserted, namely- 
"Provided that where the appropriate Government is the State Government, 
this sub-clause shall have effect as if the words, figures and letters "before 
the 31st day of December, 1959" had been deleted; and 
(ii) for the words "Provided that "the words "Provided further that" shall be 
substituted; 
(iii) in sub-clause (iii) the following Provisos shall be added at the end, 
namely - 
"Provided that, the State Government may, instead of fixing minimum rates 
of wages under this sub-clause for the whole State, fix such rates for a part of 
the State : 
Provided further that, where the State Government has for any reason not 
fixed the minimum rates of wages in respect of any such employment before 
the expiry of one year from the date of such notification, nothing contained 
in this sub-clause shall, after the commencement of the Minimum Wages 
(Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1961, prevent the State Government from fixing 
the minimum rates of wages in respect of such employment even after the 
expiry of the said period of one year,". 
(2) To sub-section (1A), the following Proviso shall be added, namely- 
"Provided that, where the State Government has for any reason not fixed the 
minimum rates of wages in respect of any scheduled employment within one 
year from the date on which it came to a finding as aforesaid in respect of 
such employment, nothing contained in this sub-section shall, after the 
commencement of the Minimum Wages (Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1961 
prevent the State Government from fixing the minimum rates of wages in 
respect of such employment even after the expiry of the said period of one 
year" - Gujarat Act No. 22 ol 1961. 
KERALA 
In sub-section (1) of section 3- 
(i) in the opening words, for the words "The appropriate Government "the 
words "The State Government" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (a),- 
(a) in sub-clauses (i) and (ii), for the figures, letters and words "31st day of 
December, 1959", the figures, letters and words "31st day of March, 1961, or 
such other-date, not being later than the 31st day of March, 1962, as the State 
Government may, from time to time, fix by notification in the Gazette" shall 
be substituted; 
(b) after the existing proviso, the following further proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
"Provided further that where, in fixing the minimum rates of wages of any 
employment under sub-clause (1) or sub-clause (ii), any class of employees 
is left out, the State Government may, at any time fix the minimum rates of 
wages payable to such class of employees. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this proviso, the expression "employees let 
out" with reference to an employment shall include: 
(i) employees employed in a particular locality in the employment, the 
minimum rates of wages payable to whom have not been fixed; 
(ii) employees employed in any process or branch of work which was not in 
existence in the employment at the time when the minimum rates of wages 
were fixed" Kerala Act No. 18 of 1960. 
MADHYA PRADESH 
In section 3, 
(1) in sub-section (1),- 
(a) the proviso to sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) shall be omitted; and 
(b) after sub-clause (iii) the following provisos shall be inserted, namely 
"Provided that where for any reason, the State Government has not fixed the 
minimum rates of wages in respect of any scheduled employment within the 
periods specified in sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii), it may, by notification, 
extend from time to time, the said periods by further period not exceeding 
three years in the aggregate in each case: 
Provided further that the State Government may, instead of fixing minimum 
rates of wages under sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) for the whole State, fix such 
rates for a part of the State or for any specified class or classes of such 
employment or category or categories of employees in such employment in 
the whole State or part thereof." 
(2) To sub-section (1A), the following provisos shall be added namely:- 
"Provided that where for any reason the State Government has not fixed the 
minimum rates of wages in respect of any scheduled employment within the 
period specified in this sub-section, the State Government may, by 
notification, extend from time to time, the said period by a further period not 
exceeding one year in the aggregate: 
Provided further that the State Government may, instead of fixing minimum 
rates of wages under this sub-section for the whole State, fix such rates for a 
part of the State or for any specified class or classes of such employment or 
category or categories of employees in such employment in the whole State 
or part thereof." 
(3) After sub-section (1A), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
"(1B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the State 
Government may, at the time of review under clause (b) of that sub-section - 
(a) split up the class or classes of such employment or category or categories 
of employees in such employment or amalgamate the class or classes of such 
employment or category or categories of employees in such employment and 
revise the minimum rates of wages fixed in respect thereof under sub-section 
(1); 
(b) fix the minimum rates of wages for the class or classes of such 
employment or category or categories of employees in such employment as 
were not in existence at the time of fixing the minimum rates under sub-
section (1) or were in existence but were not covered by such fixation; 
(c) fix the minimum rates of wages, mentioned under clause (a) or clause (b), 
f or the whole State or for any such part thereof for which they were not 
fixed under sub-section (1) or extend the minimum rates fixed under sub-
section (1) for any part of the State, to the whole State or any other part 
thereof." 
(4) In sub-section (3), in sub-clause (iii) of clause (a), after the word "adults", 
the brackets and words "(males and females)" shall be inserted - Madhya 
Pradesh Act No. 23 of 1961. 
MAHARASHTRA 
(1) In clause (a) of sub-section (1),- 
(a) in sub-clause (i), the words, figures and letters "before the 31st day of 
December, 1959" shall be deleted; and the following proviso shall be added 
at the end, namely : 
"Provided that, the State Government may, instead of fixing minimum rates 
of wages under this sub-clause for the whole State, fix such rates for a part of 
the State or for any specified class or classes of such employments in the 
whole of the State or any part thereof; and in the case of an employment 
under any local authority, the State Government may fix such rates for any 
specified local authority, or class of local authorities.": 
(b) in sub-clause (it), the words, figures and letters "before the 31st day of 
December, 1959" shall be deleted: 
(c) in sub-clause (iii), the following provisos shall be added at the end, 
namely: 
"Provided that, the State Government may, instead of fixing minimum rates 
of wages under this sub-clause for the whole State, fix such -rates for a part 
of the State: 
Provided further that, where the State Government has not for any reason 
fixed the minimum rates of wages in respect of any such employment before 
the expiry of one year from the date of such notification nothing contained in 
this sub-clause shall, after the commencement of Minimum Wages 
(Maharashtra Amendment) Act, 1960, prevent the State Government from 
fixing the minimum rates of wages in respect of such employment even after 
the expiry of the said period of one year;"; 
(2) to sub-section (1A), the following proviso shall be added, namely: - 
"Provided that, where the State Government has not for any reason fixed the 
minimum rates of wages in respect of any scheduled employment within one 
year from the date on which it came to a finding as aforesaid in respect of 
such employment, nothing contained in this sub-section shall, after the 
commencement of the Minimum Wages (Maharashtra Amendment) Act, 
1960, prevent the State Government from fixing the minimum rates of wages 
in respect of such employment even after the expiry of the said period of one 
year." - Maharashtra Act Nos. 10 of 1961 and 3 of 1963. 
UTTAR PRADESH 
In sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948, in its application to Uttar Pradesh for the figure 
" 1959" wherever occurring the figure " 1960" shall be substituted vide UP. 
Act No. 20 of 1960. 
 
 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948  
Section 4: 
Minimum rate of wages. 
(1) Any minimum rate of wages fixed or revised by the appropriate 
Government in respect of scheduled employments under section 3 may 
consist of- 
(i) a basic rate of wages and a special allowance at a rate to be adjusted, at 
such intervals and in such manner as the appropriate Government may direct, 
to accord as nearly as practicable with the variation in the cost of living index 
number applicable to such workers (hereinafter referred to as the "cost of 
living allowance"); or 
(ii) a basic rate of wages with or without the cost of living allowance, and the 
cash value of the concessions in respect of supplies of essential commodities 
at concessional rates, where so authorized; or 
(iii) an all-inclusive rate allowing for the basic rate, the cost of living 
allowance and the cash value of the concessions, if any. 
(2) The cost of living allowance and the cash value of the concessions in 
respect of supplies of essential commodities at concessional rates shall be 
computed by the competent authority at such intervals and in accordance 
with such directions as may be specified or given by the appropriate 
Government. 
Section 5: 
Procedure for fixing and revising minimum wages. 
(1) In fixing minimum rates of wages in respect of any scheduled 
employment for the first time under this Act or in revising minimum rates of 
wages so fixed, the appropriate Government shall either- 
(a) appoint as many committees and sub-committees as it considers 
necessary to hold enquiries and advise it in respect of such fixation or 
revision, as the case may be, or 
(b) by notification in the Official Gazette, publish its proposals for the 
information of persons likely to be affected thereby and specify a date, not 
less than two months from the date of the notification, on which the 
proposals will be taken into consideration. 
(2) After considering the advice of the committee or committees appointed 
under clause (a) of sub-section (1), or as the case may be, all representations 
received by it before the date 'Specified in the notification under clause (b) of 
that sub-section, the appropriate Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, fix, or, as the case may be, revise the minimum rates of 
wages in respect of each schedule employment, and unless such notification 
otherwise provides, it shall come into force on the expiry of three months 
from the date of its issue: 
Provided that where the appropriate Government proposes to revise the -
minimum rates of wages by the mode specified in clause (b) of sub-section 
(1), the appropriate Government shall consult the Advisory Board also. 
Section 6: 
Advisory committees and sub-committees. 
Omitted by the Minimum Wages (Amendment) Act, 1957 
Section 7: 
Advisory Board. 
For the purpose of co-ordinating the work of [17] [committees and sub 
committees appointed under section 5] and advising the appropriate 
Government generally in the matter of fixing and revising minimum rates of 
wages, the appropriate Government shall appoint an Advisory Board. 
Section 8: 
Central Advisory Board. 
(1) For the purpose of advising the Central and State Governments in the 
matters of the fixation and revision of minimum rates of wages and other 
matters under this Act and for co-ordinating the work of the Advisory 
Boards, the Central Government shall appoint a Central Advisory Board. 
(2) The Central Advisory Board shall consist of persons to be nominated by 
the Central Government representing employers and employees in the 
scheduled employments, who shall be equal in number, and independent 
persons not exceeding one-third of its total number of members; one of such 
independent persons shall be appointed the Chairman of the Board by the 
Central Government. 
Section 9: 
Composition of committees, etc. 
Each of the committees, sub-committees [18] [***] and the Advisory Board 
shall consist of persons to be nominated by the appropriate Government 
representing employers and employees in the scheduled employments, who 
shall be equal in number, and independent persons not exceeding one-third of 
its total number of members; one of such independent persons shall be 
appointed the Chairman by the appropriate Government. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
MADHYA PRADESH 
In section 9,- 
(1) after the words "and independent persons", the words "including officers 
of Government" shall be inserted; 
(2) for the words "such independent persons", the words "such independent 
persons or such officers of Government" shall be substituted; and 
(3) the following proviso and the Explanation shall be inserted, namely :- 
"Provided that the number of officers of Government shall not exceed two. 
Explanation: In this section,- 
(i) "a person representing employer" shall mean- 
(a) an employer; or 
(b) an officer of an association of employers; or 
(c) an officer of a federation of association of employers to which the 
association referred to in clause (b) is affiliated; 
(ii) "a person representing employees" shall means, - 
(a) an employee; or 
(b) an officer of trade union functioning in the scheduled employment; or 
(c) an officer of a federation of trade unions in the State to which the trade 
union ref erred to in clause (b) is affiliated" - Madhya Pradesh Act No. 23 of 
1961. 
After section 9, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 
"9A. Finality of orders constituting Board, Committee, Sub-con7n7ittee, etc.- 
No order of the State Government nominating any person as the Chairman or 
a member of the Advisory Board or a Committee or sub-committee shall be 
called in question in any manner and no act or proceeding before any Board. 
Committee or Sub-committee shall be called in question in any manner in 
any Court of Law on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in or 
of any defect or irregularity in the Constitution of such Board, Committee or 
Sub-committee -Madhya Pradesh Act No. 23 of 1961. 
RAJASTHAN 
To section 9 as the following Explanation shall be added and shall be 
deemed always to have been added, namely:- 
"Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, an officer of the State 
Government shall be deemed to be 'independent' notwithstanding that the 
State Government is an employer in any scheduled employment"- Rajasthan 
Act No. 4 of 1969. 
After section 9, the following new section shall be inserted, namely- 
"9A. Finality of orders constituting Board, Committee, Sub-committee- No 
order of the State Government nominating any person as Chairman or a 
Member of the Advisory Board or a Committee or Sub-committee shall be 
called in question in any manner and no action or proceedings before any 
Board, Committee or Sub-committee shall be called in question in any 
manner in any Court of law on the ground merely of the existence of any 
vacancy in or of any defect or irregularity in the constitution of such Board, 
Committee or Sub-Committee."- Vide Rajasthan Act No. 4 of 1969. 
TAMIL NADU 
After section 9, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 
"9A. Saving-No order of the State Government nominating any person as the 
Chairman or a member of the Advisory Board or a Committee or 
Subcommittee shall be called in question in any manner and no act or 
proceeding before any Board, Committee or sub-committee shall be called in 
question in any manner in any Court of law on the ground merely of the 
existence of any vacancy in or of any defect or irregularity in the constitution 
of, such Board, Committee or Sub-committee" - Tamil Nadu Act No. 47 of 
1981. 
Section 10: 
Correction of errors. 
(1) The appropriate Government may, at any time, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, correct clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any order fixing 
or revising minimum rates of wages under this Act, or errors arising therein 
from any accidental slip or omission. 
(2) Every such notification shall, as soon as may be after it is issued, be 
placed before the Advisory Board for information. 
Section 11: 
Wages in kind. 
(1) Minimum wages payable under this Act shall be paid in cash. 
(2) Where it has been the custom to pay wages wholly or partly in kind, the 
appropriate Government being of the opinion that it is necessary in the 
circumstances of the case may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
authorize the payment of minimum wages either wholly or partly in kind. 
(3) If the appropriate Government is of the opinion that provision should be 
made for the supply of essential commodities at concession rates, the 
appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, -
authorize the provision of such supplies at concession rates. 
(4) The cash value of wages in kind and of concession in respect of supplies 
of essential commodities at concession rates authorized under sub-sections 
(2) and (3) shall be estimated in the prescribed manner. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
MADHYA PRADESH 
Section 11 shall be renumbered as section 4A-Act No. 23 of 1961.  
Minimum Wages Act, 1948  
Section 12: 
Payment of minimum rates of wages. 
(1) Where in respect of any scheduled employment a notification under 
section 5 [20] [***] is in force, the employer shall pay to every employee 
engaged in a scheduled employment under him wages at a rate not less than 
the minimum rate of wages fixed by such notification for that class of 
employees in that employment without any deductions except as may be 
authorized within such time and subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall affect the provisions of the 
Payment of Wages Act 1936 (4 of 1936). 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
BIHAR 
In section 12 after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
"(1A) Where immediately before the issue of a notification under section 5 
fixing or revising the minimum rates of wages in respect of any scheduled 
employment, wages at a rate higher than the rate so fixed or revised, were 
payable either by contract or agreement, or, under any other law for the time 
being in force, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, wages at 
such higher rate shall be payable to the employees in such scheduled 
employment and the wages so payable shall be deemed to be the minimum 
wages for the purposes of this Act." - Bihar Ordinance No. 41 of 1982. 
MADHYA PRADESH 
In section 12 after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
"(1A) Where immediately before the issue of a notification under section 5 
fixing or revising the minimum rates of wages in respect of any scheduled 
employment, wages at a rate higher than the rate so fixed or revised, were 
payable under this Act, or under any law or award or agreement or custom or 
usage for the time being in force, then notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, wages at such higher rate shall be payable to the employees in such 
scheduled employment and the wages so payable shall be deemed to be the 
minimum wages for the purposes of this Act." - Madhya Pradesh Act No. 23 
of 1961. 
Section 13: 
Fixing hours for a normal working day, etc. 
(1) In regard to any scheduled employment minimum rates of wages in 
respect of which have been fixed under this Act, the appropriate Government 
may 
(a) fix the number of hours of work which shall constitute a normal working 
day, inclusive of one or more specified intervals; 
(b) provide for a day of rest in every period of seven days which shall be 
allowed to all employees or to any specified class of employees and f or the 
payment of remuneration in respect of such day of rest; 
(c) provide for payment for work on a day of rest at a rate not less than the 
overtime rate. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall, in relation to the following 
classes of employees, apply only to such extent and subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed: 
(a) employees engaged on urgent work, or in any emergency which could not 
have been foreseen or prevented; 
(b) employees engaged in work in the nature of preparatory or 
complementary work which must necessarily be carried on outside the limits 
laid down for the general working in the employment concerned; 
(c) employees whose employment is essentially intermittent; 
(d) employees engaged-in any work which for technical reasons has to be 
completed before the duty is over; 
(e) employees engaged in a work which could not be carried on except at 
times dependent on the irregular action of natural forces. 
(3) For the purposes of clause (c) of sub-section (2) employment of an 
employee is essentially intermittent when it is declared to be so by the 
appropriate Government on the ground that the ' daily hours of duty of the 
employee, or if there be no daily hours of duty as such for the employee, the 
hours of duty, normally include periods of inaction during which the 
employee may be on duty but is not called upon to display either physical 
activity or sustained attention.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
MAHARASHTRA 
In section 13,- 
(a) in sub-section (1),after clause (a) the following shall be inserted, namely:- 
"(aa) fix the number of hours of work which shall constitute a normal 
working week;" 
(b) in sub-section (3), after the words "the appropriate Government "the 
words "or by an *officer not below the rank of a Deputy Commissioner of 
Labour especially authorised by the State Government in this behalf" shall be 
inserted - Madhya Pradesh Act No. 3 of 1963. 
Section 14: 
Overtime. 
(1) Where an employee, whose minimum rate of wages is fixed under this 
Act by the hour, by the day or by such a longer wage-period as may be 
prescribed, works on any day in excess of the number of hours constituting a 
normal working day, the employer shall pay him for every hour or for part of 
an hour so worked in excess at the overtime rate fixed under this Act or 
under any law of the appropriate Government for the time being in force, 
whichever is higher. 
(2) Nothing in this Act shall prejudice the operation of the provisions of [23] 
[section 59 Of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948)] in any case where those 
provisions are applicable. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
MADHYA PRADESH 
In section 14 after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
"(1A) The State Government may, by notification, fix the limit for over time 
work in any scheduled employment subject to such conditions and 
restrictions as may be specified in the notification" -Madhya Pradesh Act No. 
23 of 1961. 
Section 15: 
Wages of worker who works for less than normal working 
day. 
If an employee whose minimum rate of wages has been fixed under this Act 
by the day works on any day on which he was employed for a period less 
than the requisite number of hours constituting a normal working day, he 
shall, save as otherwise hereinafter provided, be entitled to receive wages in 
respect of work done by him on that day as if he had worked for a full 
normal working day: 
Provided, however, that he shall not be entitled to receive wages for a full 
normal working day- 
(i) in any case where his failure to work is caused by his unwillingness to 
work and not by the omission of the employer to provide him with work, and 
(ii) in such other cases and circumstances as,,-nay be prescribed. 
Section 16: 
Wages for two or more classes of work. 
Where an employee does two or more classes of work to each of which a 
different minimum rate of wages is applicable, the employer shall pay to 
such employee in respect of the time respectively occupied in each such class 
of work, wages at not less than the minimum rate in- force in respect of each 
such class. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
MADHYA PRADESH 
In section 16 for the words "in respect of the time respectively occupied in 
each such class of work, wages at not less than the minimum rate in respect 
of each such class" the words "wages at the highest of the rates prescribed for 
such class" shall be substituted - Madhya Pradesh Act No. 23 of 1961. 
Section 17: 
Minimum time rate wages for piece work. 
Where an employee is employed on piece work for which minimum time rate 
and not a minimum piece rate has been fixed under this Act, the employer 
shall pay to such employee wages at not less than the minimum time rate. 
Section 18: 
Maintenance of registers and records. 
(1) Every employer shall maintain such registers and records giving such 
particulars of employees employed by him, the work performed by them, the 
wages paid to them, the receipts given by them and such other particulars and 
in such form as may be prescribed. 
(2) Every employer shall keep-exhibited, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, in the factory, workshop or place where the employees in the 
scheduled employment may be employed; or in the case of out-workers, in 
such factory, workshop or place as may be used for giving out-work to them 
notices in the prescribed form containing prescribed particulars. 
(3) The appropriate Government may, by rules made under this Act, provide 
for the issue of wage books or wage slips to employees employed in any 
scheduled employment in respect of which minimum rates of wages have 
been fixed and prescribe the manner in which entries shall be made and 
authenticated in such wage books or wage slips by the employer or his agent. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
BIHAR 
In section 18 after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
"(4) The appropriate Government may, by rules made under this Act, also 
provide for the issue of identity cards and service certificate to employees 
employed in any scheduled employment in such form and containing such 
particulars as may be prescribed." - Bihar Act No. 9 of 198& 
MADHYA PRADESH 
In section 18 after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
"(4) Every employer shall in such scheduled employments as the State 
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, display notice of 
period of work including over-time in respect of all or any of his employees 
in such manner as may be prescribed." - Madhya Pradesh Act No. 23 of 
1961. 
After section 18, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 
"18A. Chief Inspector- The State Government may, by notification appoint 
any person to be the Chief Inspector who shall exercise such powers and 
perform such duties throughout the State as may be prescribed."- Madhya 
Pradesh Act No. 23 of 1961. 
MAHARASHTRA 
In section 18 in sub-section (3), after the words "wage slips" at both the 
places where they occur, the words "and attendance cards" shall be inserted - 
Maharashtra Act No. 3 of 1963. 
Section 19: 
Inspectors. 
(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be Inspector for the purposes of this 
Act, and define the local limits within which they shall exercise their 
functions. 
(2) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, an Inspector may, within the 
local limits for which he is appointed - 
(a) enter, at all reasonable hours, with such assistants (if any), being persons 
in the service of the Government or any local or other public authority, as he 
thinks fit, any premises or place where employees are employed or work is 
given out to out-workers in any scheduled employment in respect of which 
minimum rates of wages have been fixed under this Act, for the purpose of 
examining any register, record of wages or notices required to be kept or 
exhibited by or under this Act or rules made there under, and require the 
production thereof for inspection; 
(b) examine any person whom he finds in any such premises or place and 
who, he has reasonable cause to believe, is an employee employed therein or 
an employee t6 whom work is given out therein; 
(c) require any person giving out-work and any out-workers, to give any 
information, which is in his power to give, with respect to the names and 
addresses of the persons to, for and from whom the work is given out or 
received, and with respect to the payments to be made for the work; 
(d) seize or take copies of such register, record of wages or notices or 
portions thereof as he may consider relevant in respect of an offence under 
this Act which he has reason to believe has been committed by an employer; 
and 
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed. 
(3) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant with in the 
meaning of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
(4) Any person required to produce any document or thing or to give any 
information by an inspector under sub-section (2) shall be deemed to be 
legally bound to do so within the meaning of section 175 and section 176 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)]. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
BIHAR 
In section 19 in sub-section (2) after clause (d), the following new clauses 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
"(dd) take or accept statement of the guardian of such employee who, 
because of certain physical or mental disabilities (deaf, dumb, etc.) cannot 
give a statement about payment of wages less than the minimum rates of 
wages fixed for that employee's class of work, or less than the amount due to 
him under the provisions of the Act, 
(ddd) conduct any application presented under sub-section (2) of section 20 
of the Act before any authority appointed under sub-section (1) of section 20 
of the Act." - Bihar Ordinance No. 41 of 1982. 
MADHYA PRADESH 
In section 19,- 
(1) in sub-section (1), for the words "and define the local limits within which 
they shall exercise their functions" the words "specify the areas within which 
they shall exercise their respective jurisdictions" shall be substituted; 
(2) in sub-section (2),- 
(a) for the words "local limits for which he is appointed" the words "areas of 
his jurisdiction" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (a), after the words "other public authority" the words "or such 
person representing employers or such person representing employees" shall 
be inserted; and 
(c) after clause (e), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely 
'Explanation: For the purpose of clause (a) expressions "a person 
representing employer" and "a person representing employees" shall have the 
meaning assigned to those expressions in section 9.'- Madhya Pradesh Act 
No. 23 of 1961. 
Section 20: 
Claims. 
(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint any Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation or any officer of 
the Central Government exercising functions as a Labour Commissioner for 
any region, or any officer of the State Government not below the rank of 
Labour Commissioner or any] other officer with experience as a Judge of a 
Civil Court or as a stipend any Magistrate to be the Authority to hear and 
decide for any specified area all claims arising out of payment of less than 
the minimum rates of wages [27] [or in respect of the payment of 
remuneration for days of rest or for work done on such days under clause (b) 
or clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 13 or of wages at the overtime rate 
under section 14] to employees employed or paid in that area. 
(2) Where an employee has any claim of the nature referred to in sub-section 
(1)] the employee himself, or any legal practitioner or any official of a 
registered trade union authorized in writing to act on his behalf, or any 
Inspector, or any person acting with the permission of the Authority 
appointed under subsection (1), may apply to such Authority for a direction 
under sub-section (3): 
Provided that every such application shall be presented within six months 
from the date on which the minimum wages [29] [or other amount] became 
payable: 
Provided further that any application may be admitted after the said period 
of six months when the applicant satisfies the Authority that he had sufficient 
cause for not making the application within such period. 
(3) When any application under sub-section (2) is entertained, the Authority 
shall hear the applicant and the employer, or give them an opportunity of 
being heard, and after such further inquiry, if any, as it may consider 
necessary, may, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the 
employer may be liable under this Act, direct- 
(i) in the case of a claim arising out of payment of less than the minimum 
rates of wages, the payment to the employee of the amount by which the 
minimum wages payable to him exceed the amount actually paid, together 
with the payment of such compensation as the Authority may think fit, not 
exceeding ten times the amount of such excess; 
(ii) in any other case, the payment of the amount due to the employee, 
together with the payment of such compensation as the Authority may think 
fit, not exceeding ten rupees,and the Authority may direct payment of such 
compensation in cases where the excess or the amount due is paid by the 
employer to the employee before the disposal of the application. 
(4) If the Authority hearing any application under this section is satisfied that 
it was either malicious or vexatious, it may direct that a penalty not 
exceeding fifty rupees be paid to the employer by the person presenting the 
application.] 
(5) Any amount directed to be paid under this section may be recovered 
(a) if the Authority is a Magistrate, by the Authority as if it were a fine 
imposed by the Authority as a Magistrate, or 
(b) if the Authority is not a Magistrate, by any Magistrate to whom the 
Authority makes application in this behalf, as if it were a fine imposed by 
such Magistrate. 
(6) Every direction of the Authority under this section shall be final. 
(7) Every Authority appointed under sub-section (1) shall have all the powers 
of a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the 
purpose of taking evidence and of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and 
compelling the production of documents, and every such Authority shall be 
deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter 
XXXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898). 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
BIHAR 
In section 20- 
(a) in sub-section (1) for the words "or any officer of the State Government 
not below the rank of a Labour Commissioner" the words "or any such 
officer of the State Government not below the rank of an Assistant 
Commissioner of Labour" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (3) after the words "the Authority shall hear the applicant 
and the employer" and before the word "or" the word "summarily" shall be 
inserted; and 
(c) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
"(5) Any amount directed to be paid under this sections shall be recoverable 
as an arrear of Land Revenue."; 
(d) for sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
"(6) Any employer or worker aggrieved by any direction made under 
subsection (3) by an authority appointed under sub-section (1) on an 
application made under sub-section (2), may, within 30 days from the date of 
the direction, prefer an appeal in such manner and to such authority as the 
State Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, and that 
authority may, after hearing the appeal, confirm, modify or reverse the 
direction appealed against and no further appeal shall lie against the order 
made by such authority in any Court of Law."; and 
(e) after sub-section (6) so substituted, the following new sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
"(6A) The authority referred to in sub-section (6) may, if it is satisfied that 
the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal 
within the period specified in sub-section (6), allow the appeal to be 
preferred within a further period of 30 days but not thereafter. Bihar 
Ordinance No. 41 of 1982. 
In section 20- 
(i) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- 
"(4A) No employer shall, during the pendency of any proceedings arising out 
of any claim case, take any action against any employee concerned in such 
claim case - 
(a) by. altering to the prejudice of such employee, the conditions of service 
applica6le to him immediately before the commencement of such 
proceedings, and 
(b) by discharging, terminating the services in any manner or punishing 
whether by dismissal or otherwise of such workers, save with the express 
permission in writing of the Authority before whom the proceeding is 
pending."; 
(ii) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:~ 
"(5A) At the time of hearing, the authority may direct the employers to 
deposit at least 50% of the claimed amount with the authority excluding the 
amount of compensation. The said amount may be paid to the claimant 
which shall be adjusted subsequently with the decreed amount." - Bihar Act 
No. 9 of 1988 
KARNATAKA 
In sub-section (1) of section 20, for the words "stipendary Magistrate" the 
words "Judicial Magistrate" shall be substituted, vide Mysore Act No. 13 of 
1965. 
MADHYA PRADESH 
In section 20,- 
(i) in the provisos to sub-section (2), for the words "six months" occurring 
twice, the words "one year" shall be substituted; and 
(ii) to sub-section (4) the following proviso shall be added, namely:- 
"Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any application filed 
by an Inspector under sub-section (2)." -Madhya Pradesh Act No. 23 of 
1961. 
For sub-section (1) of section 20 the following sub-section shall be 
substituted namely:- 
"(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette 
appoint any Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation or any officer of 
the Central Government exercising functions as a Labour Commissioner of 
any region or any officer of the State Government not below the rank of 
Labour Commissioner or any other officer with experience as a Judge of a 
Civil Court or as a stipendary Magistrate or any Revenue Officer not below 
the rank of Naib-Tahsildar to be the Authority to hear and decide for any 
specified area all claims arising out of payment of less than minimum rates 
of wages or in respect of the payment of remuneration for days of rest or for 
work done on such days under clause (b) or clause(c)of sub-section (1) of 
section 13 of wages at the overtime rate under section 14, to employees 
employed or paid in that area." - Madhya Pradesh Act No. 36 of 1976. 
MAHARASHTRA 
In section 20 in sub-section (1) after the words "payment of less than the 
minimum rates of wages" the words, brackets and figures "or in respect of 
wages not paid within the time prescribed under sub-section (1) of section 
12" shall be inserted Maharashtra Act No. 3 of 1963. 
In section 20 to sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be added, 
namely:- 
"Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint any Block Development Officer, Tahsildar, Additional 
Tahsildar or Naib-Tahsildar to be the Authority to hear and decide for any 
area specified in the notification all such claims of employees employed or 
paid in employment in agriculture in the area so specified. 
Explanation-For the purposes of this proviso, the expression "Block 
Development Officer" has the meaning assigned to it in the Maharashtra 
Parishads and Panchayat Samitis Act, 1961 (Mah. 5 of 1962)." -Maharashtra 
Act No. 25 of 1976. 
RAJASTHAN 
In section 20, in sub-section (1), after the expression "Labour 
Commisisoner", the expression "or a Vikas Adhikari appointed under the 
Rajasthan Panchayat Samitis and Zila Parishads Act, 1959 (Rajasthan Act 37 
of 1959)"shall be inserted - Rajasthan Act No. 11 of 1976 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948  
Section 21: 
Single application in respect of a number of employees. 
(1)Subject to such rules as maybe prescribed, a single application] may be 
presented under section 20 on behalf or in respect of any number of 
employees employed in the scheduled employment in respect of which mini-
mum rates of wages have been fixed and in such cases the maximum 
compensation which may be awarded under sub-section (3) of section 20 
shall not exceed ten times the aggregate amount of such excess [32] [or ten 
rupees per head as the case may be.-' 
(2) The Authority may deal with any number of separate pending 
applications presented under section 20 in respect of employees in the 
scheduled employments in respect of which minimum rates of wages have 
been fixed, as a single application presented under sub-section (1) of this 
section and the provisions of that sub-section shall apply accordingly. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
GUJARAT 
After section 21, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 
"21A Liability for payment of Court-fees.- 
(1) In any proceedings under section 20 the applicant shall not be liable to 
pay any court-fees (other than fees payable for service of process) in respect 
of such proceedings: 
Provided that, when the application is presented by an Inspector, he shall not 
be liable to pay the process fees also. 
(2) Where the applicant succeeds in such proceedings, the authority hearing 
the application shall calculate the amount of court fees which would have 
been payable by the appli6ant but for sub-section (1), and direct the 
employer or other person responsible for the payment of wages under section 
12 to pay the amount to the State Government. The amount shall, without 
prejudice to any other mode of recovery, be recoverable as an arrear of land 
revenue." -Gujarat Act No. 22 of 1961. 
MAHARASHTRA 
After section 21, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 
"21A. Liability for payment of Court-fee.- 
(1) In any Proceedings under section 20 the applicant shall not be liable to 
pay any court-fees (other than fees payable for service of process) in respect 
of such proceeding: 
Provided that, when the application is presented by an Inspector, he shall not 
be liable to pay the process fees also. 
(2) Where the applicant succeeds in such proceedings, the authority hearing 
the application shall calculate the amount of court-fees which would have 
been payable by the applicant but for sub-section (1), and the employer or 
other person responsible for the payment of wages under section 12 to pay 
the amount to the State Government. The amount shall, without prejudice to 
any other mode of, recovery, be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue." - 
Maharashtra Act No. 10 of 1961. 
Section 22: 
Penalties for certain offences. 
Any employer who- 
(a) pays to any employee less than the minimum rates of wages fixed for that 
employee's class of work, or less than the amount due to him under the 
provisions of this Act, or 
(b) contravenes any rule or order made under section 13, shall be punishable 
with 'Imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both: Provided that in 
imposing any fine for an offence under this section, the Court shall take into 
consideration the amount of any compensation already awarded against the 
accused in any proceedings taken under Section 20. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
MAHARASHTRA 
In section 22 in clause (a), after the words "Provisions of this Act" the 
following shall be inserted, namely:- 
 or fails to pay the wages within the time prescribed under sub-section (1) of 
section 12"-vide Maharashtra Act No. 3 of 1963. 
After section 22, the following new section shall be inserted, namely:- 
"22A. Penalty for obstructing Inspector. -Whoever wilfully obstructs an 
Inspector in the exercise of any power conferred on him by or under this Act, 
or fails to produce on demand by an Inspector any registers, records or other 
documents in his custody kept in pursuance of this Act, and which he is 
required to produce by or under this Act shall, on conviction, be punished 
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees."-vide Maharashtra Act 
No. 3 of 1963. 
Section 22A: 
General provision for punishment of other offences. 
Any employer who contravenes any provision of i this Act or of any rule or 
order made there under shall, if no other penalty is provided for such 
contravention by this Act, be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.] 
STATE AMENDMENT 
BIHAR 
For section 22A, the following section shall be substituted namely:- 
"22A. General provision for pun is h men t of other offences.-Any employer 
who contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule or order made there 
under shall, if no other penalty is provided in this act for such contravention, 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both."- vide 
Bihar Ordinance No. 41 of 1982. 
Section 22B: 
Cognizance of offences. 
(1) No Court shall take cognizance of a complaint against any pet-son for an 
offence- 
(a) under clause (a) of section 22 unless an application in respect of the facts 
constituting such offence has been presented under section 20 and has been 
granted wholly or in part, and the appropriate Government or an officer 
authorised by it in this behalf has sanctioned the making of the complaint; 
(b) under clause (b) of section 22 or under section 22A except on a complaint 
made by or with the sanction of, an Inspector. 
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence- 
(a) under clause (a) or clause (b) of section 22, unless complaint thereof is 
made within one month of the grant of sanction under this section;3 
(b) under section 22A, unless complaint thereof is made within six months of 
the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
BIHAR 
In section 22B in sub-section (1) for clause (a), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
"(a) under clause (a) of section 22 unless the State Government or an officer 
authorised by it in this behalf has sanctioned the making of the complaint." 
vide Bihar Ordinance No 41 of 1982. 
In clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 22B the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely :- 
"Provided that the Court, if it is satisfied that the State Government or any 
officer authorised by it in this behalf was prevented by sufficient cause from 
sanctioning the making of the complaint within the period specified in 
subsection (2), shall condone the delay and allow the complaint to be made 
even after the expiry of the said period."- vide Bihar Act No. 9 61198& 
GUJARAT 
In section 22B in sub-section (2), for clause (b), the following shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
"(b) under section 22A, unless the complaint thereof is made within six 
months of the date on which the offence becomes known to the Inspector."- 
vide Gujarat Act No. 22 of 1961. 
MADHYA PRADESH 
In section 22B in clause (a) of sub-section (i), for the words and figures 
"unless an application in respect of the facts constituting such offence has 
been presented under section 20", the words and figures" unless a claim 
under section 20 has been preferred before the authority" shall be substituted; 
and 
(ii) in sub-section (2) in clause (a), for the words "one month" the words 
"three months" shall be substituted  vide Madhya Pradesh Act No 23 of 
1961. 
MAHARASHTRA 
In section 22B in sub-section (2), for clause (b), the following shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
"(b) under section 22A, unless the complaint thereof is made within six 
months of the date on which the offence becomes known to the Inspector."- 
vide Maharashtra Act No. 10 of 1961. 
Section 22C: 
Offences by companies. 
(1) If the person committing any offence under this Act is a company, every 
person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company 
as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such 
person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the 
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any, director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,- 
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals, and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
MADHYA PRADESH 
After section 22C of the Principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted,. namely:- 
"22CC. Liability of principles in certain cases-  
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), where in any scheduled 
employment in respect of which minimum rates of wages have been fixed 
under this Act, any person (hereinafter in this section referred to as the 
principal) contracts with any other person (hereinafter in this section referred 
to as the contractor) for having any goods made for sale f or the purposes of 
the trade or business of the principal either wholly or partly out of materials 
supplied to the contractor by such principal, then notwithstanding that the 
employees for making such goods are employed by the contractor, the 
principal shall also in addition to the contractor be deemed for all purposes of 
this Act to be the employer in relation to such employees: 
Provided that where by virtue of the provisions of sub-section (1) a principal 
is convicted of an offence punishable under section 22, he shall be 
punishable only with fine as provided for in that section. 
(2) The provisions of this section shall apply only to such scheduled 
employments as the State Government may, by notification, specify in that 
behalf." - Vide Madhya Pradesh Act Nos. 11 of 1959 and 23 of 1961. 
UTTAR PRADESH 
After section 22C, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 
"22CC Compounding of Offences.-An Officer specially empowered by the 
State Government in this behalf by notification may, subject to any general' 
or special order of the State Government in this behalf, compound any 
offence punishable under this Act with fine only committed for the first time, 
either before or after the institution of the prosecution, on realization of such 
amount of composition fee as he thinks fit, not exceeding the maximum 
amount of fine fixed for the offence; and where the offence is so 
compounded- 
(i) before the institution of the prosecution, the offender shall not be liable to 
prosecution for such offence and shall, if in custody, be set at liberty; 
(ii) after the institution of the prosecution, the composition shall amount to 
acquittal of the offender" - vide UP Act No. 35 of 1979. 
MANIPUR 
After section 22C, the following section shall be inserted, namely- 
"22CC. Compounding of offences.-An officer specially empowered by the 
State Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette may, 
subject to any general or special order of the State Government in this behalf, 
compound any offence punishable under this Act with fine only committed 
for the first time either before or after the institution of the prosecution on 
realisation of such amount of composition fee as he thinks fit, not exceeding 
the maximum amount of fine fixed for the offence, and where the offence is 
so compounded- 
(i) before the institution of the prosecution, the offender shall not be liable to 
prosecution for such offence and shall, if in custody, be set at liberty; 
(ii) after the institution of the prosecution, the composition shall amount to 
acquittal of the offender."-Manipur Act No. 5 of 1993. 
Section 22D: 
Payment of un disbursed amounts due to employees. 
All amounts payable by an employer to an employee as the amount of 
minimum wages of the employee under this Act or otherwise due to the 
employee under this Act or any rule or order made there under shall, if such 
amounts could not or cannot be paid to the employee on account of his death 
before payment or on account of his whereabouts not being known, be 
deposited with the prescribed authority who shall deal with the money so 
deposited in such manner as may be prescribed. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
MADHYA PRADESH 
Section 22D shall be renumbered as section 23 - Madhya Pradesh Act No. 23 
of 1961.  
Section 22E: 
Protection against attachment of assets of employer with 
Government. 
Any amount deposited with the appropriate Government by an employer to 
secure the due performance of a contract with that Government and any other 
amount due to such employer from that Government in respect of such 
contract shall not be liable to attachment under any decree or order of any 
Court in respect of any debt or liability incurred by the employer other than 
any debt or liability incurred by the employer towards any employee 
employed in connection with the contract aforesaid. 
Section 22F: 
Application of Payment of Wages Act, 1936, to scheduled 
employments. 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 
(4 of 1936), the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), all or any of 
the provisions of the said Act, shall with such modifications, if any, as may 
be specified in the notification, apply to wages payable to employees in such 
scheduled employments as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Where all or any of the provisions of the said Act are applied to wages, 
payable to employees in any scheduled employment under sub-section (1), 
the Inspector appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be the Inspector 
for the purpose of enforcement of the provisions so applied within the local 
limits of his jurisdiction.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
MADHYA PRADESH 
In section 22F in sub-section (2), for the words "local limits" the word "area" 
shall be substituted. - vide Madhya Pradesh Act No. 23 of 1961. 
After section 22F, the following section shall be inserted, namely - 
"22G. Registration of certain scheduled employments   
(1) Every employer shall, in such scheduled employments as the State 
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, get his 
establishment registered in such manner and on payment of such fees as may 
be specified in the notification. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (i) shall apply to such of establishments to which 
the provisions of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 4 1948) or Madhya Pradesh 
Shops and Establishments Act." -vide Madhya Pradesh Act No. 23 of 1961. 
Section 23: 
Exemption of employer from liability in certain cases. 
Where an employer is charged with an offence against this Act, he shall be 
entitled, upon complaint duly made by him, to have any other person whom 
he charges as the actual offender, brought before the Court at the time 
appointed for hearing the charge; and if, after the commission of the offence 
has been proved, the employer proves to the Satisfaction of the Court - 
(a) that he has used due diligence to enforce the execution of this Act, and 
(b) that the said other person committed the offence in question without his 
knowledge, consent or connivance, that other person shall be convicted of 
the offence and shall be liable to, the like punishment as if he were the 
employer and the employer shall be discharged: 
Provided that in seeking to prove, as aforesaid, the employer may be 
examined on oath, and the evidence of the employer or his witness, if any, 
shall be subject to cross-examination by or on behalf of the person whom the 
employer charges as the actual offender and by the prosecution. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
MADHYA PRADESH 
Section 23 shall be renumbered as section 22D - Act No. 23 of 1961. 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948Section 24: 
Bar of suits. 
No Court shall entertain any suit for the recovery of wages insofar as the sum 
so claimed - 
(a) forms the subject of an application under section 20 which has been 
presented by or on behalf of the plaintiff, or 
(b) has formed the subject of a direction under that section in favour of the 
plaintiff, or 
(c) has been adjudged in any proceeding under that section not to be due to 
the plaintiff, or 
(d) could have been recovered by an application under that section. 
Section 25: 
Contracting out. 
Any contractor agreement, whether made before or after the commencement 
of this Act whereby an employee either relinquishes or reduces his right to a 
minimum rate of wages or any privilege or concession accruing to him under 
this Act shall be null and void insofar as it purports to reduce to minimum 
rate of wages fixed under this Act. 
Section 26: 
Exemptions and exceptions. 
(1) The appropriate Government may, subject to such conditions, if any, as it 
may think fit to impose, direct that the provisions of this Act shall not apply 
in relation to the wages payable to disabled employees. 
(2) The appropriate Government may, if for special reasons it thinks so fit, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that Subject to such conditions 
and] for such period as it may specify the provisions of this Act or any of 
them shall not apply to all or any class of employees employed in any 
scheduled employment or to any locality where there is carried on a 
scheduled employment. 
(2A) The appropriate Government may, if it is of opinion that having regard 
to the terms and conditions of service applicable to any class of employees in 
a scheduled employment generally or in a scheduled employment in a local 
area, 39 or to any establishment or a part of any establishment in a scheduled 
employment] it is not necessary to fix minimum wages in respect of such 
employees of that class or in respect of employees in such establishment or 
such part of any establishment] as are in receipt of wages exceeding such 
limit as may be prescribed in this behalf, direct, by notification in the Official 
Gazette and subject to such conditions, if any, as it may think fit to impose, 
that the provisions of this Act or any of them shall not apply in relation to 
such employees. 
(3) Nothing in this Act shall apply to the wages payable by an employer to a 
member of his family who is living with him and is dependent on him. 
Explanation- In this sub-section a member of the employer's family shall be 
deemed to include his or her spouse or child or parent or brother or sister. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
MADHYA PRADESH 
In section 26 after sub-section (2A), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: 
"(2AA) Where the State Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or 
expedient in the public interest so to do, it may by notification and subject to 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified therein direct that all or any of 
the provisions of this Act shall not apply in relation to all or any class of 
employers in any scheduled employment" - Madhya Pradesh Act No. 23of 
1961. 
MAHARASHTRA 
In section 26 to sub-section (2A), the following proviso shall be added 
namely: 
"Provided that, the powers of the State Government under this sub-section 
may, subject to the control of the State Government be exercised by the 
Commissioner of Labour." -Maharashtra Act No. 3 of 1963. 
Section 27: 
Power of State Government to add to Schedule. 
The appropriate Government, after giving by notification in the Official 
Gazette not less than three months notice of its intention so to do, may, by 
like notification, add to either Part of the Schedule any employment in 
respect of which it is of opinion that minimum rates of wages should be fixed 
under this Act, and thereupon the Schedule shall in its application to the State 
be deemed to be amended accordingly. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
BIHAR 
After section.27, the following sections shall be inserted, namely: 
"27A. Protection to persons acting under the Act. - No suit, prosecution or 
other legal proceeding whatsoever shall lie against any person for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in due discharge of his 
duties under this Act. 
27B. Transfer of cases from one Court to another. - The State Government or 
any authority subordinate to it if so authorised by the State Government by 
an order in writing in this behalf, may by notification in the Official Gazette, 
withdraw or recall any case pending at any time before any Authority 
appointed under sub-section (1) of section 20 of the Act and transfer the 
same to another appointed authority for disposal in the prescribed manner." -
Bihar Ordinance No. 41 of 1982. 
MADHYA PRADESH 
For section 27, the following section shall be substituted, namely: 
"27. Power of State Government to amend Schedule.  The State 
Government after giving, by notification, not less than three months notice of 
its intention so to do, may, by like notification, - 
(a) add to either Part of the Schedule, any employment in respect of which it 
is of opinion that minimum rates of wages should be fixed under this Act, 
(b) modify or rescind any entry in either Part of the Schedule; and thereupon 
the Schedule shall in this application to the State be deemed to be amended 
accordingly." -Madhya Pradesh Act No. 23 of 1961. 
After section 27, the following sections shall be inserted, namely: 
"27A. Protection to persons acting under the Act. - No suit, prosecution or 
other legal proceeding whatsoever shall lie against any person for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
27B. Delegation of power-  
(1) The State Government may, by order, direct that any power, other than 
the power exercisable by it under sections 27 and 30 shall in such 
circumstances and in such manner, if any, as may be specified in the 
direction, be exercised by any officer not below the rank of Assistant 
Commissioner of Labour or authority subordinate to it. 
(2) Nothing in the Act shall derogate from the right of the State Government 
to exercise any power delegated to any officer or authority subordinate to it." 
- Madhya Pradesh Act No. 23 of 1961. 
Section 28: 
Power of Central Government to give directions. 
The Central Government may give directions to a State Government as to the 
carrying into execution of this Act in the State. 
Section 29: 
Power of the Central Government to make rules. 
The Central Government may, subject to the condition of previous 
publication, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules prescribing 
the term of office of the members, the procedure to be followed in the 
conduct of business, the method of voting, the manner of filling up casual-
vacancies in membership and the quorum necessary for the transaction of 
business of the Central Advisory Board. 
Section 30: 
Power of appropriate Government to make rules. 
(1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of previous 
publication, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules 
may - 
(a) prescribe the term of office of the members, the procedure to be followed 
in the conduct of business, the method of voting, the manner of filling up 
casual vacancies in membership and the quorum necessary for the transaction 
of business of the committees, sub-committees [40-41] [***] and the 
Advisory Board; 
(b) prescribe the method of summoning witnesses, production of documents 
relevant to the subject-matter of the enquiry before the committees, 
subcommittees [40-41] [***] and the Advisory Board; 
(c) Prescribe the mode of computation of the cash value of wages in kind and 
of concessions in respect of supplies of essential commodities at 
concessional rates; 
(d) prescribe the time and conditions of payment of, and the deductions 
permissible from wages; 
(e) provide for giving adequate publicity to the minimum rates of wages 
fixed under this Act; 
(f) provide for a day of rest in every period of seven days and for the 
payment of remuneration in respect of such day, 
(g) prescribe the number of hours of work which shall constitute a normal 
working day; 
(h) prescribe the cases and circumstances in which an employee employed 
for a period of less than the requisite number of hours constituting a normal 
working day shall not be entitled to receive wages for a full normal working 
day; 
(i) prescribe the form of registers and records to be maintained and the 
particulars to be entered in such registers and records; 
(j) provide for the issue of wage books and wage slips and prescribe the 
manner of making and authenticating entries in wage books and wage slips; 
(k) prescribe the powers of Inspectors for purposes of this Act; 
(l) regulate the scale of costs that may be allowed in proceedings under 
section 20; 
(m) prescribe the amount of court-fees payable in respect of proceedings 
under section 20; and 
(n) provide for any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
MAHARASHTRA 
In section 30 in sub-section (2), 
(1) in clause (g), for the words "a normal working day" the words "a normal 
working day or week" shall be substituted; 
(2) in clause (1), for the words "and wages slips", at both the places where 
they occur, the words "or wage slips and attendance cards" shall be 
substituted - vide Maharashtra Act No. 3 of 1963. 
Section 30A: 
Rules made by Central Government to be laid before 
Parliament. 
Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid as 
soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in 
session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.] 
 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
MADHYA PRADESH 
After section 30, the following section shall be inserted, namely: 
"30A. Removal of difficulties.-If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the 
provisions of this Act, the State Government may, by order, do anything, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, which appears to it to be 
necessary or expedient for the purposes of removing the difficulties." 
Madhya Pradesh Act No. 23 of 1961. 
Section 31: 
Validation of fixation of certain minimum rates of wages. 
Where during the period - 
(a) commencing on the 1st day of April, 1952, and ending with the date of 
the commencement of the Minimum Wages (Amendment) Act, 1954 (6 of 
1954); or 
(b) commencing on the 31st day of December, 1954, and ending with the 
date of the commencement of the Minimum Wages (Amendment) Act, 1957 
(30 of 1957);.or 
(c) commencing on the 31st day of December, 1959, and ending with the 
date of the commencement of the Minimum Wages (Amendment) Act, 1961, 
minimum rates of wages have been fixed by an appropriate government as 
being payable to employees, employed in any employment specified in the 
Schedule in the belief or purported belief that such rates were being fixed 
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3, as in force immediately 
before the commencement of the Minimum Wages (Amendment) Act, 1954 
(26 of 1954), or the Minimum Wages (Amendment) Act, 1957 (30 of 1957), 
or the Minimum Wages (Amendment) Act, 1961, as the case may be, such 
rates shall be deemed to have been fixed in accordance with law and shall not 
be called in question in any court on the ground merely that the relevant date 
specified for the purpose in that clause had expired at the time the rates were 
fixed: 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall extend, or be construed 
to extend, to affect any person with any punishment or penalty whatsoever 
by reason of the payment by him by way of wages to any of his employees 
during any period specified in this section of an amount which is less than 
the minimum rates of wages referred to in this section or by reason of 
noncompliance during the period aforesaid with any order or rule issued 
under section 13.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
MADHYA PRADESH 
After section 31, the following section shall be inserted, namely: 
"31A. Validation o1certain minimum rates of wages, - 
(1) The rates of minimum wages fixed or revised in respect of employment 
Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 11 in Part I of the Schedule to the Principal Act, 
under the Government of Madhya Pradesh Labour Department Notification 
Nos. 306 to 309-XVI-58, dated the 30th December, 1958 shall be and shall 
always be deemed to have been validly fixed or revised and shall be deemed 
to have come into force on the date mentioned in the said notifications, 
notwithstanding any judicial decision to the contrary or any defect or 
irregularity in the constitution of the Advisory Board under section 7 of the 
Principal Act read with section 9 thereof or publication of the notifications in 
the Gazette or non-compliance with any other requirement of law and shall 
not be called in question in any court merely on the ground that there was 
failure to comply with the provisions of the Principal Act. 
(2) The rates of minimum wages fixed or revised in respect of employment 
specified in Part 11 of the Schedule to the Principal Act under the 
Government of Madhya Pradesh, Labour Department Notification No. 9758-
XVI, dated the 31st December, 1959, shall be and shall always be deemed to 
have been validly fixed or revised, notwithstanding any defect or irregularity 
in the constitution of the Committee under section 5(1)(a) of the Principal 
Act read with section 9 thereof, or publication of the notification in the 
Gazette or noncompliance with any other requirement of law and shall not be 
called in question in any court merely on the ground that there was f allure to 
comply with the provisions of the Principal Act: 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall extend or be construed 
to extend to affect any person with any punishment or penalty whatsoever by 
reason of the payment by him by way of wages to any of his employees 
during the period between the dates on which the aforesaid notifications 
came into force and the date on which this Act comes into force, an amount 
which is less than the minimum rates of wages or less than the rates of wages 
immediately prevailing before the said notifications or by reason of 
noncompliance during the period aforesaid with any order or rule issued 
under section 13 of the Principal Act." - Madhya Pradesh Act No. 23 of 
1961. 
RAJASTHAN 
After section 3 1, the following section shall be inserted, namely: 
"31A. Validation o1certain minimum rates and wages.- The rates of 
minimum wages fixed or revised before the commencement of the Minimum 
Wages (Rajasthan Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 1968 fn respect 
of employment Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, in Part I of the 
Schedule to the Act and employment in agriculture in Part 11 of the Schedule 
to the Act, shall be and shall be deemed always to have been validly fixed or 
revised, as the case may be, and shall be deemed to have come into force on 
the date such fixation or revision has been brought into force by the State 
Government by a notification in the Official Gazette, notwithstanding any 
judicial decision to the contrary or any defect or irregularity in the 
constitution of the Committee or the Sub-committee, or the Advisory Board 
under section 5 or section 7 of the Act, read with section 9 thereof or 
publication of the notification in the Official Gazette or non-compliance with 
any other requirement of law and shall not be called in question in any court 
merely on the ground that there was a failure to comply with the provisions 
of the Act - Rajasthan Act No. 4 of 1969. 
 
